Executive Summary
INTRODUCTION
1. Health “is a state of complete physical, 
mental and social well-being and 
not merely the absence of disease or infirmity”.  This is the definition of the 
World Health Organization . Health status 
has important social, economic, behavioural and environmental determinants and wide-ranging impacts. Typically health has been viewed largely in a human-only context. However, there is increasing recognition of the broader health concept that encompasses 
other species, our ecosystems and the integral 
ecological underpinnings of many drivers or protectors of health risks.
2. Biological diversity  (biodiversity) is “the 
variability among living organisms from 
all sources including, inter alia, terrestrial, 
marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are 
part; this includes diversity within species, 
between species and of ecosystems.” This 
deﬁnition of the Convention on Biological Diversity (Article 2) reﬂects diﬀerent levels of biodiversity (inclu ding genetic diversity, 
species and ecosystems) and the complexities of biotic and abiotic interactions. The attributes and interactions of biotic and abiotic components determine ecosystem processes and their properties. The eﬀective management of ecosystems as part of comprehensive public health measures requires that these various complex linkages 
and interactions be identiﬁed and understood.3. Biodiversity underpins ecosystem 
functioning and the provision of goods and services that are essential to human health and well-being. Ecosystems, 
including our food production systems, depend on a whole host of organisms: primary producers, herbivores, carnivores, decomposers, pollinators, pathogens, natural enemies of pests. Services provided by ecosystems include food, clean air and both the quantity and quality of fresh water, medicines, spiritual and cultural values, 
climate regulation, pest and disease regulation, 
and disaster risk reduction. Biodiversity is a key environmental determinant of human health; the conservation and the sustainable use of biodiversity can beneﬁt human health by maintaining ecosystem services and by maintaining options for the future.
4. The links between biodiversity and 
health are manifested at various spatial and temporal scales. At a planetary scale, 
ecosystems and biodiversity play a critical role 
in determining the state of the Earth System, 
regulating its material and energy ﬂows and its 
responses to abrupt and gradual change. At a more intimate level, the human microbiota – the symbiotic microbial communities present 
on our gut, skin, respiratory and urino-genital 
tracts, contribute to our nutrition, can help regulate our immune system, and prevent infections.GLEN BOWES
1 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Health5. Biodiversity and human health, and 
the respective policies and activities, 
are interlinked in various ways . First, 
biodiversity gives rise to health benefits. For example, the variety of species and genotypes provide nutrients and medicines. Biodiversity also underpins ecosystem functioning which provides services such as water and air puriﬁcation, pest and disease control and pollination. However, it can also be a source of pathogens leading to negative 
health outcomes. A second type of interaction 
arises from drivers of change that aﬀect both 
biodiversity and health in parallel. For example, 
air and water pollution can lead to biodiversity 
loss and have direct impacts on health. A third 
type of interaction arises from the impacts of health sector interventions on biodiversity and of biodiversity-related interventions on human health. For example, the use of pharmaceuticals may lead to the release of active ingredients in the environment and 
damage species and ecosystems, which in turn 
may have negative knock-on eﬀects on human 
health. Protected areas or hunting bans could 
deny access of local communities to bushmeat 
and other wild sourcs of food and medicines with negative impacts on health. Positive interactions of this type are also possible; for example the establishment of protected areas may protect water supplies with positive health beneﬁts.
6. Direct drivers of biodiversity loss include 
land-use change, habitat loss, over-exploitation, pollution, invasive species and climate change. Many of these drivers aﬀect human health directly and through their impacts on biodiversity. The 
continued decline of biodiversity, including loss or degradation of ecosystems, is reducing the ability of biodiversity and ecosystems to provide essential life-sustaining services and, in many cases, leads to negative outcomes for 
health and well-being. Ecosystem degradation 
may lead to both biodiversity loss and increased risk from infectious diseases. In turn, the indirect drivers of biodiversity loss 
are demographic change and large-scale social and economic processes. Social change and development trends (such as urbanization), poverty and gender also influence these drivers of change. Macro-economic policies 
and structures and public policies that provide 
perverse incentives or fail to incorporate the 
value of biodiversity often compound the dual 
threat to biodiversity and public health.
7. Human population health is determined, 
to a large extent, by social, economic and 
environmental factors. Social determinants 
of health include poverty, gender, sex, age, and rural versus urban areas. Vulnerable people, and groups (such as women and the poor) who tend to be more reliant on biodiversity and ecosystem services suﬀer disproportionately from biodiversity loss and have less access to social protection mechanisms (for example, access to healthcare). A social justice perspective is needed to address the various dimensions of 
equity in the biodiversity and health dynamic. 
Vulnerability and adaptation assessments are 
needed and should be tailored to the contexts 
of these populations.
8. Women and men have diﬀerent roles in the 
conservation and use of biodiversity and varying health impacts. Access to, use, and 
management of biodiversity has diﬀerential gender health impacts shaped by respective cultural values and norms which in turn determine roles, responsibilities, obligations, beneﬁts and rights. Institutional capacity and legal frameworks often inadequately reﬂect diﬀerential gender roles. There is also a lack of gender disaggregated data on biodiversity access, use and control and on the diﬀerential health impacts of biodiversity change.
9. The social and natural sciences are 
important contributors to biodiversity 
and health research and policy. Integrative 
approaches, such as the ecosystem approach, ecohealth and One Health, unite different fields and require the development of mutual understanding and cooperation across disciplines. 
2 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human HealthMulti-disciplinary research and approaches 
can provide valuable insights on the drivers 
of disease emergence and spread, contribute to 
identifying previous patterns of disease risk, and help predict future risks through the lens of social-ecological systems. Such challenges 
necessitate engagement of many stakeholders, 
including governments, civil society, and non-
governmental and international organizations. 
Integrative approaches such as these make it possible to maximize resource eﬃciency as well as conservation, health and development outcomes. While their value is increasingly recognized for infectious disease prevention and control, their wider applications and beneﬁts can also extend to other areas. For example, to the assessment of environmental health exposures and outcomes, better 
understanding of the health services provided 
by biodiversity, and of how anthropogenic changes to an ecosystem or biodiversity may inﬂuence disease risks.
WATER, AIR QUALITY AND HEALTH
ERIC SALES / ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK / FLICKR
Access to clean water is fundamental to human health 
and a priority for sustainable development. Yet, almost 1 billion people lack access to safe drinking water and 2 million annual deaths are attributable to 
unsafe water, sanitation and hygiene. Biodiversity and 
ecosystems play a major role in regulating the quantity and quality of water supply but are themselves degraded by pollution.
10. Ecosystems provide clean water that 
underpin many aspects of human health. 
All terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems play a role in underpinning the water cycle including regulating nutrient cycling and soil erosion. Many ecosystems can also play a role in managing pollution; the water puriﬁcation services they provide underpin water quality. Mountain ecosystems are of particular signiﬁcance in this regard. Many protected 
areas are established primarily to protect water 
supplies for people.
11. Freshwater ecosystems, such as rivers, lakes 
and wetlands, face disproportionately high 
levels of threats due largely to demands on 
water and impacts of human activities such 
as dam construction and mining . In some 
regions, up to 95% of wetlands have been lost and two-thirds of the world’s largest rivers are now moderately to severely fragmented by dams and reservoirs. Freshwater species have declined at a rate greater than any other biome, with the sharpest decline in tropical freshwater biomes. More than one-third of the accessible renewable freshwater on earth is consumptively used for agriculture, 
industrial and domestic use, which often leads 
to chemical pollution of natural water sources. 
Other human activity, such as mining, can also 
lead to bioaccumulation and biomagniﬁcation.
12. Impaired water quality results in 
significant social and economic costs.  
Ecosystem degradation–for example through 
eutrophication caused by excessive nutrients–
is a major cause of declines in water quality. Left untreated, poor quality water results in massive burdens on human health, with the 
most pronounced impacts on women, children 
and the poor. Maintaining or restoring healthy 
ecosystems (for example, through protected areas) is a cost-eﬀective and sustainable way 
to improve water quality while also beneﬁtting 
biodiversity.
3 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Health13. Water-related infrastructure has positive 
and negative impacts on biodiversity, 
livelihoods, and human health.  Altered 
waterways (e.g. dams, irrigation canals, urban drainage systems) can provide valuable beneﬁts to human communities, but may be costly to build and maintain, and in some 
cases increase risks (e.g. ﬂood risk from coastal 
wetlands degradation). They can also diminish 
native biodiversity and sometimes increase the incidence of water- borne or water-related 
illnesses such as schistosomiasis. Approaches integrating beneﬁts of both physical/built and natural infrastructure can provide more sustainable and cost-eﬀective solutions.
Air pollution is one of the most significant 
environmental health risks worldwide, responsible for 
seven million deaths in 2012. Bronchial asthma and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are on the rise. 
Cardiovascular disease, immune disorders, various cancers, and disorders of the eye, ear, nose and throat 
are also aﬀected by air pollution. Air pollution also aﬀects biodiversity; it can reduce plant biodiversity and aﬀect other ecosystem services, such as clean water and carbon storage.
14. 
Ecosystems may aﬀect air quality and have 
primarily beneﬁcial outcomes for human 
health. Ecosyste ms affect air quality in 
three main ways: (1) Deposition  – ecosystems 
directly remove air pollution, through absorption or intake of gases through leaves, and through direct deposition of particulate matters on plant surfaces; (2) Changes in 
meteorological patterns – as ecosystems aﬀect local temperature, precipitation, air ﬂows, etc., they also aﬀect air quality and pollutant emissions. By altering climate and shading buildings, ecosystems in cities alter energy 
use and consequent greenhouse gas emissions; 
(3) Emissions  – many ecosystems emit volatile 
organic carbons (VOCs) including terpenes and arenes. While sometimes considered as pollutants, many natural VOCs play a critical role in atmospheric chemistry and air quality regulation. Ecosystems also release pollen, sometimes associated with acute respiratory problems. Burning of vegetation is also associated with signiﬁcant pollution emissions.
15. Components of biodiversity can be used 
as bioindicators of known human health 
stressors, as well as in air and water quality 
mapping, monitoring, and regulation.  
Lichens are among the most widely utilized and well-developed indicators of air quality to date and are making headway as reliable indicators for air quality regulation. The shift in species is predictable and often correlates highly with deposition measures, making lichens an accurate, cost-eﬀective tool for mapping and monitoring. Other groups of organisms with high local biological diversity (e.g., insects and other arthropods) have high potential as bioindicators because they have the capacity to provide more ﬁne-grained information about the state of ecosystems; they are also relatively easy to survey. Water quality can be monitored through chemical analysis but long-term trends in freshwater ecosystems are perhaps better monitored using the diversity of aquatic organisms (e.g., benthic invertebrates) as proxy for water quality and ecosystem health.UNDP BANGLADESH / FLICKR
4 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human HealthBIODIVERSITY, FOOD 
PRODUCTION AND NUTRITION
BIOVERSITY
Agricultural productivity has increased substantially 
over the last 50 years yet some 800 million people are food insecure. It is estimated that by 2050 food 
production will have to feed over 9 billion people, many 
of whom will be wealthier and demand more food with 
proportionately more meat and dairy products that have greater ecological footprints.
Biodiversity underpins the productivity and resilience 
of agricultural and other ecosystems. However, land use change and agriculture are dominant causes of biodiversity loss.
16. Biodiversity in and around agricultural 
production systems makes essential 
contributions to food security and health. Biodiversity is the source of the components 
of production  (crops, livestock, farmed ﬁsh), 
and the genetic diversity within these that ensures continuing improvements in food 
production, allows adaptation  to current 
needs and ensures adaptability  to future ones. 
Agricultural biodiversity is also essential for agricultural production systems, underpinning ecosystem services such as pollination, pest control, nutrient cycling, erosion control and water supply .
17. 
The loss of diversity from agro-ecosystems 
is increasing the vulnerability and reducing 
the sustainability of many production systems and has had negative effects on human health. While there have been significant increases in food production through the introduction of higher yielding uniform varieties and breeds, loss of genetic diversity in production systems through monocropping of uniform crop varieties or animal breeds has led to instances of large production losses and, in some cases, has had signiﬁcantly negative health consequences . 
Loss of diversity has also resulted in the 
reduced provision of regulating and supporting 
ecosystem services, requiring additional 
chemical inputs and creating negative feedback 
loops.
18. The use of chemical inputs, particularly 
pesticides, has had severe negative consequences for wildlife, human health and for agricultural biodiversity. While 
the control of disease vectors such as malaria 
has generated health benefits, the use of pesticides, especially in agriculture, has led to serious environmental pollution, aﬀected human health (25 million people per year suﬀer acute pesticide poisoning in developing countries) and caused the death of many non-target animals, plants and ﬁsh. The use of agricultural biodiversity to help cope with pests and diseases and to increase soil quality 
is a win-win option which produces beneﬁts to 
human health and to biodiversity.
19. Po llination is essential to food security 
generally and to the production of many 
of the most nutritious foods in particular . 
Pollinators play a significant role in the production of approximately one third of global food supply. Pollination also aﬀects the quantity, nutritional content, quality, and variety of foods available. Global declines of pollinator species diversity and in numbers of pollinators have critical implications for 
5 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthfood security, agricultural productivity and, 
potentially, human nutrition.
20. Increas ing sustainable production and 
meeting the challenges associated with climate change will require the increased use of agricultural biodiversity. Climate change is already having an impact the nutritional quality and safety of food and increasing the vulnerability of food insecure individuals and households. The increased use of agricultural biodiversity will play an 
essential part in the adaptation and mitigation 
actions needed to cope with climate change and ensuring continued sustainable supplies of healthy food, providing adaptive capacity, diverse options to cope with future change and enhanced resilience in food production systems.
S. PADULOSI / BIOVERSITY
21. Agricultural practices, which make 
improved use of agricultural biodiversity, have been identiﬁed and are being used 
around the world. Their potential value needs 
to be more widely recognized and their adoption 
more strongly supported through research and 
support for appropriate policy and economic regimes, including appropriate support to small-scale producers. Inter-disciplinary analysis and cross-sectoral collaboration (among the agriculture, environment, health and nutrition communities) is essential to ensure the integration of biodiversity into policies, programmes and national and regional plans of action on food and nutrition security.Malnutrition is the single largest contributor to the global 
burden of disease aﬀecting citizens of every country in the world from the least developed to the most. Two 
billion people are estimated to be deﬁcient in one or more 
micronutrients. At the same time, the consumption of 
poor-quality processed foods, together with low physical 
activity, has contributed to the dramatic emergence of obesity and associated chronic diseases.
B. VINCETI / BIOVERSITY
A diversity of species, varieties and breeds, as well as wild sources (ﬁsh, plants, bushmeat, 
insects and fungi) underpins dietary diversity 
and good nutrition. Variety-speciﬁc diﬀerences 
within staple crops can often be the diﬀerence between nutrient adequacy and nutrient deficiency in populations and individuals. Signiﬁcant nutrient content diﬀerences in meat 
and milk among breeds of the same animal species 
have also been documented. Wildlife, from aquatic 
and terrestrial ecosystems, is a critical source of calories, protein and micronutrients like iron and zinc for more than a billion people. Fish provide 
more than 3 billion people with important sources 
of protein, vitamins and minerals.
22. Access to wildlife in terrestrial, marine, 
and freshwater systems is critical to 
human nutrition, and global declines will present major public health challenges for resource-dependent human populations, particularly in low- and middle- income countries. Even a single portion of local 
traditional animal-source foods may result in signiﬁcantly increased clinical levels of energy, protein, vitamin A, vitamin B6/B12, vitamin D, vitamin E, riboﬂavin, iron, zinc, magnesium and fatty acids–thus reducing the risk of micronutrient deﬁciency. The use 
6 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthof wild foods increases during the traditional 
‘hungry season’ when crops are not yet ready for harvest, and during times of unexpected household shocks such as crop failure or illness. However, wildlife populations are in worldwide decline as a result of habitat destruction, over-exploitation, pollution and invasive species. Conservation strategies can therefore provide signiﬁcant public health dividends.
23. The harvest ing and trade of wild edible 
plants and animals provides additional beneﬁts but also risks.  The collection and 
trade of wild foods indirectly contributes to 
health and well-being by providing income for 
household needs, particularly in less developed 
countries.  Aggregating across numerous local 
level studies, estimates of the annual value of the bushmeat trade alone in west and central Africa range between US$42 and 205 million (at 2000 values). This scale of economy poses important subsistence benefits. Hunting, butchering, consumption, global trade, and/or contact in markets with other species can 
also presents risks of transmission and spread 
of infectious disease
S. LANDERSZ / BIOVERSITY
24. Food based approaches are needed to 
help combat malnutrition and promote health. A healthy, balanced diet requires a variety of foods to supply the full range of nutrients needed (vitamins, minerals, individual amino acids and fatty acids, and other beneﬁcial bioactive food components)  While fortiﬁcation and bio-fortiﬁcation may be cost-eﬀective solutions to address speciﬁc nutrient deficiencies (e.g. vitamin A and iron), they cannot provide the full range of nutrients needed. Food based approaches can be supported by a greater focus on nutrition and biological diversity in agricultural, food system and value chain programs and policies 
(compared to a dominant focus on a few staple 
crops), including by promoting traditional food systems and food cultures.
25. 
Some dietary patterns that oﬀer substantial 
health beneﬁts could also reduce climate change and pressures on biodiversity. The 
global dietary transition towards diets higher in reﬁned sugars, reﬁned fats, oils and meats, are increasing the environmental footprint of the food system and also increasing the incidence of type II diabetes, coronary heart disease and other chronic non-communicable diseases. Some traditional diets, such as the 
Mediterranean diet, and alternative vegetarian 
or near-vegetarian diets, if widely adopted, would reduce global agricultural greenhouse gas emissions, reduce land clearing and 
resultant species extinctions, and help prevent 
diet-related chronic non-communicable diseases.
MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND 
NONCOMMUNICABLE DISEASES
NIAID / FLICKR
Non-communicable diseases are becoming prevalent 
in all parts of the world. Some NCDs including autoimmune diseases, type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis, allergic disorders, eczema, asthma, 
inﬂammatory bowel diseases and Crohn’s disease may 
7 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthbe linked to depleted microbial diversity in the human 
microbiome.
26. Humans, like all complex plants and animals 
have microbiota without which they could 
not survive. The human microbiome contains 
ten times more microorganisms than cells that 
comprise the human body. These occur inter 
alia on the skin, and in the gut, airways and 
urogenital tracts. The biodiversity of bacteria, viruses, fungi, archaea and protozoa of which microbes are comprised, and the interactions of microbes within the complex human microbiome, inﬂuence both the physiology of and susceptibility to disease and play an important role in the processes that link environmental changes and human health. The realization that humans are not merely “individuals”, but rather complex ecosystems may be one of the major advances in our understanding of human health in recent years, with signiﬁcant implications for both ecology and human health.
27. Environmental  microbial ecosystems are 
in constant dialogue and interchange with the human symbiotic ecosystems.   
Microbes from the environment supplement 
and diversify the composition of the symbiotic 
microbial communities that we pick up from mothers and family, which in turn play signiﬁcant roles from a physiological perspective.   Our physiological requirements 
for microbial biodiversity are evolutionarily determined. In addition to supplementation 
of the symbiotic microbiota by organisms from 
the natural environment, the adaptability of the human microbiota (for example, to enable digestion of novel foods) depends upon acquiring organisms with the relevant capabilities, or genes encoding necessary enzymes from the environment by horizontal gene transfer. Therefore, we need appropriate contact with potential sources of genetic 
innovation and diversity, and our adaptability 
is threatened by loss of biodiversity in the gene 
reservoir of environmental microbes.28. Several categories of org anism with 
which we co-evolved play a role in setting up the mechanisms that “police” and regulate the immune system . In addition 
to the microbiota, some other organisms (the “Old Infections”) that caused persistent infections or carrier states in hunter-gatherer communities were always present during 
human evolution, and so had to be tolerated by 
the immune system. Therefore they co-evolved 
roles in inducing the mechanisms that regulate 
the immune system, terminate immune 
activity when it is no longer needed, and block 
inappropriate attack on self (autoimmunity), allergens (allergic disorders) or gut contents (inﬂammatory bowel disease). Some of these immunoregulation-inducing organisms, for example a heavy load of helminths, can have detrimental eﬀects on health, and so are eliminated by modern medicine in high-
income settings. This increases the importance 
of the immunoregulatory role of microbiota 
and the microbial environment in high-income 
settings, where these categories of organism need to compensate for loss of these “Old Infections”.
29. Reduced contact of people with the 
natural environment and biodiversity and 
biodiversity loss in the wider environment 
leads to reduced diversity in the human 
microbiota, which itself can lead to immune 
dysfunction and disease. The immune 
system needs an input of microbial diversity from the natural environment in order to establish the mechanisms that regulate it. When this regulation fails there may be immune responses to forbidden targets such as our own tissues (autoimmune diseases; type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis), harmless allergens and foods (allergic disorders, eczema, asthma, hay fever) or gut contents (inflammatory bowel diseases, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease). Urbanization and loss of access to green spaces are increasingly discussed in relation to these NCDs. Half of the world’s population already lives in urban areas and this number is projected to increase markedly in the next half century, with the 
8 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthmost rapid increase in low- and middle-
income countries. Combined, these ﬁndings suggest an important opportunity for cross-
over between health promotion and education 
on biodiversity.
30. Failing immunoregulatory mechanisms 
partly attributable to reduced contact with the natural environment and biodiversity lead to poor control of background inﬂammation . In high-income 
urban settings, there is often continuous background inflammation even in the absence of a speciﬁc chronic inﬂammatory disorder. But persistently raised circulating levels of inﬂammatory mediators predispose to insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease and psychiatric disorders. Moreover, in high-income settings several cancers rise in parallel with the increases in chronic inflammatory disorders, because chronic inﬂammation drives mutation, and provides growth factors and mediators that stimulate tumour vascularisation and metastasis. We need to maintain the microbial biodiversity of the environment in order to drive essential regulation of the immune system.
31. Understanding the factors that inﬂuence 
functional and compositional changes in the human microbiome can contribute to 
the development of therapies that address 
the gut microbiota and corresponding diseases. Disturbances in the composition 
and diversity of the gut microbiota are 
associated with a wide range of immunological, 
gastrointestinal, metabolic and psychiatric disorders. The required microbial diversity is obtained from the individual’s mother, from other people and from animals (farms, dogs) and the natural environment. The major inﬂuences on this diversity are antibiotics, diet, and diversity loss in the environment due to urbanisation and modern agricultural 
methods. We need to document the microbial 
biodiversity and the causes of diversity loss, preserve diversity, and identify the beneﬁcial organisms and genes. These may be exploited for deliberate modiﬁcation and diversiﬁcation 
of the microbiota, which is emerging as an exciting new approach to prevention and cure of many human diseases.
32. Innovative design of cities and dwellings 
m i g h t  b e  a b l e  t o  i n c r e a s e  e x p o s u r e  t o  the microbial biodiversity that our physiological systems have evolved to expect . In high-income settings several very 
large studies reveal signiﬁcant health beneﬁts of living near to green spaces. The beneﬁts are greatest for people of low socioeconomic status. Recent data suggest that the eﬀect is not due primarily to exercise, and exposure to environmental microbial biodiversity is a plausible explanation. This provides a strong medical rationale for increased provision of green spaces in modern cities. It might be suﬃcient to supplement a few large green spaces with multiple small green spaces that deliver appropriate microbial diversity.
33. Consider ing “microbial diversity” as 
an ecosystem service provider may contribute to bridging the chasm between ecology and medicine/immunology, by considering microbial diversity in public health and conservation strategies aimed at maximizing services obtained from ecosystems.  The relationships our individual 
bodies have with our microbiomes are a microcosm for the vital relationships our 
species shares with countless other organisms 
with which we share the planet.
9 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human HealthINFECTIOUS DISEASES
CSIRO
Infectious diseases cause over one billion human 
infections per year, with millions of deaths each year globally. Extensive health and ﬁnancial burden is seen 
from both established and emerging infectious diseases. 
Infectious diseases also aﬀec t plants and animals, which 
may pose threats to agriculture and water supplies with 
additional impacts on human health.
34. Pathog ens play a complex role in 
biodiversity and health, with beneﬁts in 
some contexts and threats to biodiversity and human health in others.  The 
relationships between infectious pathogens and host species are complex; disease and microbial composition can serve vital 
regulating roles in one species or communities 
while having detrimental eﬀects on others. Microbial dynamics, and their implications for biodiversity and health, are multifactorial; similarly, the role of biodiversity in pathogen maintenance and not fully understood.
35. Human-caused c hanges in ecosystems, 
such as modified landscapes, intensive agriculture, and antimicrobial use, are 
increasing infectious disease transmission 
risks and impact.  Approximately two-
thirds of known human infectious diseases are shared with animals, and the majority of recently emerging diseases are associated with wildlife. Vector-borne diseases also account for a large share of endemic diseases. Increasing anthropogenic activity is resulting in enhanced opportunities for contact at the human/animal/environment interface that is facilitating disease spread, and through 
changing vector abundance, composition, and/or distribution. Changes in land use and food 
production practices are among leading drivers 
of disease emergence in humans. At the same time, pathogen dynamics are changing. While 
pathogen evolution is a natural phenomenon, 
factors such as global travel, climate change, and use of antimicrobial agents are rapidly aﬀecting pathogen movement, host ranges, and persistence and virulence. Beyond direct infection risks for human and animals, such changes also have implications for food security and medicine.
36. Areas of high biodiversity may have high 
numbers of pathogens, yet biodiversity may serve as a protective factor for 
preventing transmission, and maintaining 
ecosystems may help reduce exposure to 
infectious agents.  While the absolute number 
of pathogens may be high in areas of high biodiversity, disease transmission to humans is highly determined by contact, and in some 
cases, biodiversity may serve to protect against 
pathogen exposure through host species competition and other regulating functions. 
Limiting human activity in biodiverse habitats 
may reduce human exposure to high-risk settings for zoonotic pathogens while serving to protect biodiversity.
37. Infectious diseases threaten wild species 
as well as the people that depend on them. 
The health burden of infectious diseases is not limited to humans and domestic species; infectious diseases pose threat to biodiversity conservation as well. Pathogen spill-over can occur from one wild species to another, potentially causing an outbreak if the species or population is susceptible to the pathogen; similarly, diseases of domestic animals and humans can also be infectious to wild species, as seen with the local extinctions of African Wild Dog populations following the introduction of rabies virus from domestic dogs. Ebola virus has also been recognized as causing severe declines in 
great ape populations, including the critically-
endangered wild lowland gorilla troops. Past Ebola outbreaks in great apes have preceded 
10 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthhuman outbreaks, suggesting a sentinel 
or predictive value of wildlife monitoring to aid in early detection or prevention of human infections. In addition to the direct potential morbidity and mortality threats from infectious diseases to the survival of 
wild populations, infection-related population 
declines may compromise health-beneﬁtting ecosystem services that wildlife provide. For example, major declines recently seen from fungal infections associated with White Nose 
Syndrome in North American bats and chytrid 
in amphibians may aﬀect the pest control functions that these animals provide.
38. The rapidly grow ing number of invasive 
species cause signiﬁcant impacts on human 
health, and this eﬀect is expected to further 
increase in the future, due to synergistic eﬀects of biological invasions and climate change . Preventing and mitigating biological 
invasions is not only is important to protecting 
biodiversity, but can also protect human health. 
Through trade and travel, the number of invasive 
species is increasing globally as a consequence of the globalization of the economies, and the increase is expected to intensify in the future due to synergistic eﬀects with climate change. Invasive species not only impact biodiversity, 
but also aﬀect human health causing diseases or 
infections, exposing humans to bites and stings, 
causing allergic reactions, and facilitating the spread of pathogens.
MEDICINES: THE CONTRIBUTION 
OF BIODIVERSITY TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS
GENEVIÈVE ANDERSONMany of the diseases that aﬄicted or killed most 
people a century ago are today largely curable or 
preventable today thanks to medicines, many of which 
are derived from biodiversity. Yet, in many instances, the very organisms that have given humanity vital insights into human diseases, or are the sources of human medications, are endangered with extinction because of human actions.
39. Biodiversity has been an irreplaceable 
resource for the discovery of medicines 
and biomedical breakthroughs that have alleviated human suﬀering. Drugs derived 
from natural products may perhaps be the most direct and concrete  bond that many 
may ﬁnd between biodiversity and medicine. Among the breakthroughs that dramatically improved human health in the twentieth century, antibiotics rank near the top. The penicillins as well as nine of the thirteen other major classes of antibiotics in use, derive from microorganisms. Between 1981 and 2010, 75% (78 of 104) of antibacterials newly approved by the USFDA can be traced back to natural product origins. Percentages of antivirals and antiparasitics derived from natural products approved during that same period are similar or higher. Reliance upon biodiversity for new drugs continues to this day in nearly every domain of medicine.
40. For many of the most challenging health 
problems facing humanity today, we look to 
biodiversity for new treatments or insights 
into their cures. Most of the medicinal potential of nature potential has yet to be tapped. Plants have been the single greatest source of natural product drugs to date, and although an estimated 400,000 plant species populate the earth, only a fraction of these 
have been studied for pharmacologic potential.  
One of the largest plant specimen banks, the natural products repository at the National 
Cancer Institute, contains ~60,000 specimens, 
for instance. Other realms of the living world, especially the microbial and marine, are only 
beginning to be studied and hold vast potential 
for new drugs given both their diversity and the medicines already discovered from them. Many species, potential sources of medicines are threatened by extinction.
11 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Health41. Greater even than what individual species 
offer to medicine through molecules 
they contain or traits they possess, an 
understanding of biodiversity and ecology 
yield irreplaceable insights into how life works that bear upon current epidemic diseases. Consider the multiple pandemics 
that have resulted from antibiotic resistance. Human medicine tends to use a paradigm for treating infections unknown in nature which is treating one pathogen with one antibiotic. Most multicellular life (and a good share of single cellular life) produces compounds with antibiotic properties but never uses them in isolation. Infections are attacked, or more often prevented, through the secretion of several compounds at once.
TRADITIONAL MEDICINE
C. KRESTCH
Millions of people rely on traditional medicine that is dependent on biological resources, well functioning ecosystems and on the associated context speciﬁc knowledge of local health practitioners. In local communities, health practitioners trained in 
traditional and non–formal systems of medicine often 
play a crucial role in linking health-related knowledge to aﬀordable healthcare delivery.
42. Traditional medical knowledge spans 
various dimensions relating to medicines, 
food and nutrition, rituals, daily routines 
and customs.  There is no single approach to 
traditional medical knowledge. Traditional 
knowledge is not restricted to any particular period in time, and constantly undergoes re-evaluation based on local contexts. Some traditional medical systems are codiﬁed, and some even institutionalized. They range from highly developed ways of perception and understanding, classiﬁcation systems (local-taxonomies) to metaphysical precepts. Links to geography, community, 
worldviews, biodiversity and ecosystems based 
on speciﬁc epistemologies make traditional health practices diverse and unique. By extension, level of expertise is heterogeneous and therefore internal validation methods differ substantially despite an underlying philosophical principle of interconnectedness of social and natural worlds.
43. Medicinal and aromatic plants, the great 
majority of which are sourced from the wild, are used in traditional medicine and also in the pharmaceutical, cosmetic and food industries.  The global use and trade 
in medicinal plants and other biological resources, including wildlife, is high and growing. Plants used in traditional medicine 
are not only important in local health care, but 
are important to innovations in healthcare and associated international trade; they enter various commodity chains based on information gathered from their use in traditional medical pharmacopeia. Globally, an estimated 60,000 species are used for their medicinal, nutritional and aromatic 
properties, and every year more than 500,000 
tons of material from such species are traded. It is estimated that the global trade in plants 
for medicinal purposes reaches a value of over 
2,5 billion USD and is increasingly driven by industry demand.
44. Threats to medicinal plants, animals and 
other medicinal resources are increasing. Wild plant populations are declining-  one in 
ﬁve species is estimated to be threatened with 
extinction in the wild. Animals (amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals) used for food and medicine are more threatened than those not used. Overharvesting, habitat alteration, and climate change are among major drivers of declines in commercially important wild plant resources used for food and medicinal 
12 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthpurposes. These pose a threat both to the wild 
species and to the livelihoods of collectors, 
who often belong to the poorest social groups. 
There is a clear need to continue eﬀorts at 
developing assessment methods and indicators 
for conservation and sustainable use.
45. Sustainable use of medicinal resources can 
provide multiple beneﬁts to biodiversity, 
livelihoods and human health, in particular, relating to their aﬀordability, accessibility and cultural acceptability . 
Sustainable medicinal resource management for both captive-breeding and wild-collection 
is crucial for the future of traditional medicine, 
that involves all stakeholders including conservationists, private healthcare sector, medical practitioners and its consumers.  
Appropriate market-based instruments to 
enable sustainable and responsible utilization 
of resources in traditional medicine are 
required. Value chains of traditional medicines 
can be simple and local or global and extremely 
complex. Some resources have one or a few speciﬁc uses while others are used in many 
diﬀerent products and markets. In many cases 
the people who harvest these resources have little knowledge of the subsequent uses and values. Ensuring equitable economic returns to local communities by promoting value added activities at the local level could help to harness the knowledge of local communities on medicinal resources and promote their sustainable use.
46. Sui generis mod els may need to be 
developed and applied to secure rights of 
indigenous peoples and local communities 
over traditional medical knowledge and related resources. Traditional medical knowledge is often an inspiration for industrial R&D processes in bio-resource based sectors, necessitating mechanisms to secure appropriate attribution and sharing of rights and beneﬁts with knowledge holders, as set out in the Nagoya Protocol on Access to genetic resources and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their commercial 
utilization. It would be beneﬁcial to strengthen and promote existing tools, databases and registers and intellectual property rights that are sensitive to community values.
47. Improv ing public health outcomes and 
achieving objectives of ‘Health for All’ and ‘Good Health at Low Cost’ should include traditional medical care and the development of appropriate integrative methodologies and safety standards within and across medical systems. More than one-third of the population in many developing countries do not have access to modern healthcare, and are dependent on traditional medical systems. There is a high patronage of and dependence on traditional health practitioners to provide care to people with inadequate access to modern health infrastructure or with a preference for traditional systems. Pluralistic approaches that integrate natural resources and medical knowledge and are sensitive to local priorities and contexts can enable better health outcomes. This implies the need to develop cross-sectoral, cost-effective measures to test safety, eﬃcacy and quality of traditional medicines, the integration of traditional healers in the healthcare system through appropriate accreditation practices and processes, cross-learning between diﬀerent knowledge systems and disciplines through participatory, formal and informal learning processes to supplement current practices in a culturally sensitive way.
BIODIVERSITY AND MENTAL, 
PHYSICAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING
It is well established that biodiversity is a central 
component of many cultures and cultural traditions, and evidence that exposure to nature and more biodiverse environments can also provide mental and physical health beneﬁts. Over half of the world’s population lives in cities and that proportion is 
increasing. There is a rising trend for people, especially 
from poor communities, to be separated from nature and be deprived of the physical, physiological and psychological beneﬁts that nature provides.
13 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human HealthGLEN BOWES
48. The interaction with nature – inclu ding 
domestic animals, and wild animals in wild 
settings – may contribute to treatments 
for depression, anxiety, and behavioural problems, including for children.  
Exposure to nature is important to childhood development, and children who grow up with knowledge about the natural world and the importance of conservation may be more 
likely to conserve nature themselves as adults. 
Conversely, it has been stipulated that children 
in developed countries increasingly suﬀer from 
a “nature-deﬁcit disorder”, due to a reduction in the time spent playing outdoors as a result of increased use of technology and parental / societal fears for child safety. On the other hand, some research has suggested that some children, particularly those from urban areas, are fearful of spending time in certain natural habitats (woodland and wetland) owing to perceived threats from isolation, wild animals or the actions of other people.
49. 
Exposure to green space may have positive 
impacts on mental health.  Depression 
accounts for 4.3% of the global burden of disease and is among the largest single causes 
of disability worldwide, particularly for women. 
Some studies of populations in developed countries have suggested that adults exposed to green space report fewer symptoms and a 
lower overall incidence of certain diseases than 
others, and that the relationship is strongest 
for mental illnesses such as depression, anxiety 
and stress. Similarly beneﬁcial mental health impacts have been associated with greater 
exposure to microbial diversity. Other research has indicated that experience of nature can reduce recuperation times and improve recovery outcomes in hospital patients.
50. Access to natural green space can increase 
levels of physical activity with beneﬁts for health. The beneﬁts of physical activity may include reduced risk of several non-communicable diseases, as well as improved immune function. It may also provide mental 
health beneﬁts, and facilitate social connections 
and independence. Among populations for which access to open countryside is limited, particularly those in poorer inner-urban areas of large cities, access to green spaces in the urban environment can encourage regular physical activity and improve life expectancy. 
It has also been suggested that health beneﬁts 
may be more significantly attributable to 
enhanced exposure to environmental microbes 
in green spaces. There is evidence that biodiversity encourages use of urban green spaces. Eﬀorts to develop biodiverse settings, including wildlife-rich gardens, can also boost physical activity in sedentary and vulnerable patients and residents. While, the potential that green space can oﬀer for promoting and enhancing physical ﬁtness is still not fully 
recognised, there is a growing interest in many 
countries to promote and enhance “green and blue infrastructure” (terrestrial and aquatic environments) within tourism, public health and environmental policies.
B. SHAPIT / BIOVERSITY
51. Biodiversity is often central to cultures, 
cultural traditions and cultural well-being. Species, habitats, ecosystems, and 
landscapes inﬂuence forms of music, language, 
14 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthart, literature and dance. They form essential 
elements of food production systems, culinary traditions, traditional medicine, rituals, worldviews, atta chments to place and 
community, and social systems. Use of the WHO Quality Of Life Assessment (devised to determine an individual’s quality of life in the 
context of their culture and value systems) has 
shown that the environmental domain is an important part of the quality of life concept. Socio-ecological production landscapes (e.g. Satoyama in Japan) or conservation systems (e.g. sacred groves, ceremonial sites) or therapeutic landscapes (e.g. sacred healing sites), and related traditional knowledge practices can have therapeutic value and contribute to health and well-being.
52. 
Signiﬁcant changes to local biodiversity or 
ecosystem sustainability can have speciﬁc and unique impacts on local community health where the physical health of a community is directly inﬂuenced by or dependent upon ecosystem services, particularly regarding access to diverse 
food and medicinal species. Indigenous and 
local communities often act as stewards of local living natural resources based on generations of 
accumulated traditional knowledge, including 
knowledge of agricultural biodiversity, and biodiversity that supports traditional medicinal knowledge. Where local traditions and cultural identity are closely associated with biodiversity and ecosystem services, declines in the availability and abundance of such resources can have a detrimental impact on community well-being, with implications for mental and physical health, social welfare and community cohesion.
53. While many community-specific links 
between health, culture and biodiversity have been documented and measured, much of the evidence for a more universal relationship is relatively sparse beyond anecdotal accounts. However, there is 
growing recognition of the role of biodiversity 
and ecosystem services in shaping broad perspectives of quality of life.IMPACTS OF PHARMACEUTICAL 
PRODUCTS ON BIODIVERSITY AND CONSEQUENCES FOR HEALTH
Antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals are essential 
for human health and also play an important role 
in veterinary medicine. However, the release of active pharmaceutical ingredients into the environment can be harmful to biodiversity, with negative consequences for human health.
54. The release of pharmaceuticals and 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients 
(APIs) into the environment can have an impact on biodiversity, ecosystems and ecosystem service delivery, and, may, in turn negatively impact human health. A range of pharmaceuticals, including hormones, antibiotics, anti-depressants and antifungal agents have been detected in rivers and streams across the world. Most pharmaceuticals are designed to interact with a target (such as a speciﬁc receptor, enzyme, or biological process) in humans and animals to deliver the desired therapeutic eﬀect. If these targets are present in organisms in the natural environment, exposure to some pharmaceuticals might be able to elicit eﬀects in those organisms. Pharmaceuticals can also cause side eﬀects in humans and it is possible 
that these and other side eﬀects can also occur 
in organisms in the environment. During the life cycle of a pharmaceutical product, APIs may be released to the natural environment, including during the manufacturing process via human or domestic animal excretion into sewage systems, surface water or soils, when contaminated sewage sludge, sewage effluent or animal manure is applied to land. APIs may also be released into the soil environment when contaminated sewage sludge, sewage eﬄuent or animal manure is applied to land. Veterinary pharmaceuticals 
may also be excreted directly to soils by pasture 
animals. Measures are needed to reduce this environmental contamination.
55. Antibiotic and antimicrobial use can 
alter the composition and function of the 
15 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthhuman microbiome and limiting their use 
would provide biodiversity and health co-beneﬁts.  Antibiotic use can dramatically 
alter the composition and function of the human microbiome. Although much of the microbiome and its relationship to its host remains unexplored, already apparent is that changes to the variety and abundance of various microorganisms, as can occur with antibiotic use, may aﬀect everything from the host’s weight and the risk of contracting autoimmune disease, to susceptibility to infections. The microbiome may also be able to aﬀect mood and behaviour. The use of antibacterial products and antibiotics may also be linked to the increase in chronic inﬂammatory disorders, including allergies such as asthma and eczema, because they 
reduce exposure to microbial agents that set up 
the regulation of the immune system. Limiting 
the use of antimicrobial agents could provide potential co-beneﬁts for human health and biodiversity, reducing chronic inﬂammatory diseases through a healthy and more diverse 
human microbiota while also reducing the risk 
of emerging disease from antibiotic-resistant 
strains and the potential impacts of antibiotics 
on ecosystems more broadly.
56. The inappropriate use of antibiotics in 
plants, animals, and humans has cultivated 
numerous highly resistant bacterial 
strains. In some instances, resistant bacterial 
strains cannot be eﬀectively treated with any 
currently available antibiotic. Promoting the 
responsible and prudent use of antibiotics and 
antimicrobials in human health, agricultural practices and food production systems can achieve public health and biodiversity co-benefits. Poorly managed industrial agricultural practices contribute to ecosystem degradation, air and water pollution and soil 
depletion and rely heavily on the inappropriate 
use of antibiotics for both therapeutic as well 
as prophylactic (growth promotion) use, which 
may lead to environmental dispersion of 
antimicrobial agents, antibiotic resistance, and 
reduced eﬃcacy in subsequent use for medical 
or food production applications. From a health perspective, the use of antimicrobials and 
antibiotics may disrupt microbial composition, 
including the relationships between hosts and 
their symbiotic microbes, and lead to diseases. 
At the same time, antibiotic resistance in any environment can pose serious threats to public health. Aside from its potential to cultivate resistance, antibiotic use also carries the potential to disrupt symbiotic bacterial composition.
57. Endocrine disrupting chemicals found in 
pharmaceuticals products and also in many 
household, food and consumer products 
have adverse effects on the health of 
terrestrial, freshwater and marine wildlife 
and human health. The use of contraceptive 
hormones and veterinary growth hormones have been linked to endocrine disruption and reproductive dysfunction in wildlife. They also aﬀect both male and female human 
reproduction, and have been linked to prostate 
cancer, neurological, endocrinological, 
thyroid, obesity, and cardiovascular problems. 
Biodiversity has also been a good monitor for some of these human health problems. In some cases, health specialists were alerted to the scale of a potential problem through changes originally recorded in wild fish populations.
58. The inappropriate use of some non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and other veterinary drugs  threatens wildlife 
populations. For example, in the 1980s, 
populations of three previously abundant vulture species in South Asia were reduced to near extinction due to the use in livestock of diclofenac, residues of which remained in the 
carcasses of treated animals. This led to negative 
impacts on human health through spread of diseases by feral dogs as access to carcasses increased, especially among communities who rely on vultures to consume their dead. 
Following bans on the use of diclofenac and its 
replacement by meloxicam, vulture population 
declines have slowed and some show signs of recovery in the region. Without proper risk assessment and regulation the marketing and 
16 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthuse of pharmaceuticals used for livestock may 
continue to pose threats to human and wildlife 
health.
GLOBAL CHANGE ADAPTATION TO 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND DISASTER RISK REDUCTION
AIRMAN 1ST CLASS CHERYL SANZI (USAF)
59. Climate c hange is already negatively 
impacting on human health and these 
impacts are expected to intensify . Direct 
effects of climate change on health may include stroke and dehydration associated with heat waves (in particular in urban areas), 
negative health consequences associated with 
reduced air quality and the spread of allergens 
Eﬀects are also mediated through the impacts 
on ecosystems and biodiversity. Such eﬀects may include decreased food production and changes in the spread of climate-sensitive waterborne and water-related, food-borne and vector-borne diseases. There may be synergistic eﬀects of climate change, land use change, pollution invasive species and other drivers of change which can amplify impacts on both health and biodiversity.
60. Climate c hange will not only affect 
agricultural production systems but also the nutritional content of foods and the distribution and availability of ﬁsheries. Changes in temperature and precipitation patterns will have complex eﬀects, but the 
net eﬀect on food production will be negative. 
While rising levels of atmospheric carbon, tend to increase productivity, they will lead to reduced concentrations of minerals such as zinc and iron in crops such as wheat and rice. With regard to marine ﬁsheries, while there would be increased productivity at high latitudes there will be decreased productivity 
at low/mid latitudes, aﬀecting poor developing 
countries.
61. Disasters may be precipitated by impacts 
on critical ecosystems or the collapse of essential ecosystem services. Disasters 
may include disease epidemics, flooding, storm, extreme weather, and wildﬁres. Some of these may be precipitated by ecosystem disruption. There is an increase in frequency 
and intensity of some climate-related extreme 
events. Ecosystem degradation can increase the vulnerability of human populations to such disasters. New environmental impacts often occur during and after an emergency with an increased demand for certain natural resources which can place additional stress on speciﬁc ecosystems (such as groundwater resources) and their functioning.
62. Competition over access to ecosystem 
goods and services can contribute to, and become a cause of, conflict, with consequences that can negatively impact ecosystem goods and services in both the short- and long-term. Greater recognition 
needs to be given to the potential positive role 
that conservation and ecosystem management 
can play in conﬂict prevention and resolution and peace building, while the converse also holds.
63. The creation of disaster-resilient societies 
is increasingly tied to and dependent upon 
resilience in ecosystems, and sustainability 
and security in the ﬂow and delivery of essential ecosystem goods and services  
– not only those directly associated with resilience to immediate disaster impacts, but 
also those that normally support communities 
and wider society. Long-term health status is an important indicator of the resilience of a community – as a marker for capacity to overcome or adapt to health challenges and other social, environmental and economic pressures. Communities whose ability to overcome current challenges are aﬀected by 
17 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthecosystem degradation at the time of a disaster 
event – natural or man-made – are likely to be 
signiﬁcantly more vulnerable to disasters than 
communities with greater ecological security.
64. Biodiversity helps to improve resilience of 
ecosystems, contributing to adaptation to 
climate change and moderating the impacts 
of disasters. Ecosystem-based adaptation and 
mitigation strategies are needed to build the 
resilience of managed landscapes and jointly reduce the vulnerabilities of ecosystems and communities reliant upon them for their 
health, livelihoods and well-being. For example,  
Ecosystem-based approaches to ﬂood-plain and coastal development can reduce human exposure to risks from ﬂooding. Coral reefs are very eﬀective in protecting against coastal hazards (reducing wave energy by 97%) and protect over 100 million people in this way from coastal storm surges. The conservation and use of genetic resources in agriculture, aquaculture and forestry is important to allow crops, trees, ﬁsh and livestock to adapt to climate change.
SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION AND 
PRODUCTION
65. Increased pressure on the biosphere, driven 
by increasing human populations and per 
capita consumption threatens biodiversity 
and human health. Biosphere integrity 
is threatened by a number of interacting 
drivers including climate change, land-use 
change, pollution and biodiversity loss . Global 
population is projected to increase to nine to ten billion by 2050, and may continue to increase this century. Greater investment in education of girls and women and improved access to contraceptives information and services can improve human health and well-being directly and also help to slow these trends, potentially reducing pressures on ecosystems. Under business as usual scenarios, increased per-capita consumption 
will lead to even greater increased pressures on 
the biosphere. Slowing these trends requires improvements in energy and resource use efficiency, including a decarbonization of energy supplies this century. These changes will need to be complemented by increased equality in access to and use of energy and other natural resources.
66. Alternative scenario s to 2050, as well as 
practical experience, demonstrate that it is 
possible to secure food security and reduce 
poverty while also protecting biodiversity and addressing climate change and attain other human development goals, but that this requires transformational change. 
Scenario analyses show that there are multiple 
plausible pathways to simultaneously achieve globally agreed goals. Common elements of these pathways include: reducing greenhouse gas emissions from energy and industry; increasing agricultural productivity and containing agricultural expansion to prevent 
further biodiversity loss and to avoid excessive 
greenhouse gas emissions from conversion of natural habitats; restoring degraded land, protecting critical habitats; managing 
biodiversity in agricultural landscapes; reducing 
nutrient and pesticide pollution and water use; 
reducing post harvest losses in agriculture and food waste by retailers and consumers as well as moderating the increase in meat consumption. Implementing these measures requires a package of actions including legal and policy frameworks, economic incentives, and public and stakeholder engagement. Coherence of policies and coordination across sectors are essential.
67. Behavioural change is needed to improve 
human health and protect biodiversity. Human behaviour, which is informed by 
diﬀerences in knowledge, values, social norms, 
power relationships, and practices is at the core of the interlinkages between health and biodiversity, including challenges related to food, water, disease, medicine, physical and mental well-being, adaptation and mitigation of climate change. There is a need to draw upon the social sciences to motivate choices consistent with health and biodiversity objectives and to develop new approaches 
18 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healththrough, inter alia, better understanding 
of behavioural change, production and consumption patterns, policy development, and the use of non-market tools. The need for more eﬀective communication, education 
and public awareness to be spread more widely 
through school systems and other channels and to devise communication and awareness strategies on biodiversity and health.
STRATEGIES FOR HEALTH AND 
BIODIVERSITY
68. Health and biodiversity strategies could be 
developed with the aim of ensuring that 
the biodiversity and health linkages are widely recognized, valued, and reﬂected in national public health and biodiversity 
strategies, and in the programs, plans, and 
strategies of other relevant sectors, with the involvement of local communities. The implementation of such strategies could be a joint responsibility of ministries of health, environment, and other relevant ministries responsible for the implementation of environmental health programs and national biodiversity strategies and action plans. Such strategies would need to be tailored to the needs and priorities of particular countries. Such strategies might include the following objectives:
a. Promoting the health beneﬁts provided by 
biodiversity for food security and nutrition, 
water supply, and other ecosystem services, 
pharmaceuticals and traditional medicines, 
mental health and physical and cultural 
well-being. In turn, this provides a rationale 
for the conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity as well as the fair and equitable 
sharing of beneﬁts;
b. Managing ecosystems to reduce the risks 
of infectious diseases, including zoonotic and vector-borne diseases, for example by 
avoiding ecosystem degradation, preventing 
invasive alien species, and limiting or controlling human-wildlife contact;c. 
Addressing drivers of environmental change 
(deforestation and other ecosystem loss and 
degradation and chemical pollution) that harm both biodiversity and human health, including direct health impacts and those mediated by biodiversity loss;
d. Promoting lifestyles that might contribute 
jointly to positive health and biodiversity outcomes (for example, protecting traditional foods and food cultures, promoting dietary diversity)
e. 
Addressing the unintended negative impacts 
of health interventions on biodiversity (for example, antibiotic resistance, contamination from pharmaceuticals), and incorporating ecosystem concerns into public health policies.
f. 
Addressing the unintended negative impacts 
of biodiversity interventions on health (for 
example, eﬀect of protected areas or hunting 
bans on access to food, medicinal plants).
g. Adopting the One Health approach or 
other integrative approaches that consider connections between human, animal, and plant diseases and promotes cross-disciplinary synergies for health and biodiversity.
h. Educating, engaging and mobilizing the 
public and the health sector, including professional health associations as potential, powerful advocates for the sustainable management of ecosystems. Mobilize organizations and individuals who can articulate the linkage and the enormous value proposition investments in sustainable ecosystem management provide to the social and economic health of communities;
i. Monitoring, evaluating and forecasting 
progress toward the achievement of national, regional and global targets at regular intervals against evidence-based indicators, including threshold values for critical ecosystem services, such as the 
19 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthavailability and access to food, water and 
medicines.
TOOLS, METRICS AND FURTHER 
RESEARCH
69. Integration of biodiversity and human 
health concerns will require the use 
of common metrics and frameworks. Conventional measures of health are often 
too limited in focus to adequately encompass the health benefits from biodiversity. Notwithstanding the broad WHO deﬁnition of health, traditional measures of health, such as disability adjusted life years (DALYs) and burden of disease, tend to have a more narrow focus on morbidity, mortality and disability, and fail to capture the full breadth of complex linkages between biodiversity and 
health. Alternative metrics deﬁning health are 
needed to reﬂect the broad aspects of human health and well-being. Further, to increase collaboration across disciplines and sectors more attention could be paid to “translating” the meaning of key metrics to increase shared relevance. Similarly, frameworks provide a conceptual structure to build on for research, demonstration projects, policy and other purposes. Embracing a broad framework that aims to maximize the health 
of ecosystems and humans both could help the 
diﬀerent disciplines and sectors work more collaboratively. The conceptual framework of the IPBES, building upon that articulated in the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, is a framework that links biodiversity to human well-being, considering also institutions and drivers of change.
70. 
The development of comparable tools–and 
maximizing the use of existing tools–to promote a common evidence base across sectors is needed.  Tools ranging 
from systematic assessment processes (for example, environmental impact assessments, strategic environmental assessments, risk assessments, and health impact assessments) 
to the systematic reviews of research ﬁndings, 
to standardized data collection forms to computerized modeling programs should also consider health-biodiversity linkages to manage future risks and safeguard ecosystem functioning while ensuring that social costs, including health impacts, associated with new measures and strategies do not outweigh potential beneﬁts;
71. 
The development of precautionary policies 
that place a value on ecosystem services to 
health, and make positive use of linkages between biodiversity and health are needed.  For example, for integrated disease 
surveillance in wildlife, livestock and human populations as a cost-eﬀective measure to promote early detection and avoid the much 
greater damage and costs of disease outbreaks;
72. Measuring health effects of ecosystem 
change considering established “exposure” 
threshold values helps highlight 
biodiversity-health-development linkages. 
Mechanisms linking ecosystem change to health eﬀects are varied. For many sub-ﬁelds, exposure thresholds or standards have been scientiﬁcally established that serve as trigger points for taking action to avoid or minimize 
disease or disability. For example, air quality standards exist for particle pollution, WHO has established minimum quantities of per capita water required to meet basic needs, and thresholds for food security deﬁne the quantity of food required to meet individual daily nutritional needs. Measuring the health eﬀects of ecosystem change relative to established threshold values highlights how such change constitutes exposure – an important principle linking cause and disease 
or other health eﬀects –and encourages action 
if thresholds are exceeded
73. Economic valuation approaches linking 
ecosystem functioning and health that 
support decisions about resource allocation 
may appeal to a variety of stakeholders . 
Many approaches enhance understanding of ecosystem functioning and human health linkages. Common on the health side are environmental hazard or risk factor analyses. 
20 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human HealthOthers include identifying and reducing 
health disparities/inequities; focusing on environmental and socio-economic determinants of disease, and conducting health impact assessments. Conservation approaches include land-/seascape change modelling, vulnerability and adaptation 
assessments, linked health and environmental 
assessments and ecosystem service analyses.
74. Further research is needed to elucidate 
some of the potential knowledge gaps on linkages between biodiversity and human health. Examples of key questions include:a. What are the relationships between 
biodiversity, biodiversity change and infectious diseases? Speciﬁcally, what are the eﬀects of species diversity, disturbance and human-wildlife contacts? What are the implications for spatial planning?
b. What are the linkages between biodiversity 
(including biodiversity in the food production system), dietary diversity and health? Is there a relationship between 
dietary biodiversity and the composition and 
diversity of the human microbiome? What are good indicators of dietary biodiversity? What are the cumulative health impacts of ecosystem alteration?
THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS AND POST-2015 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AGENDA
75. Health and biodiversity, and the linkages 
among them and with other elements 
of sustainable development must be well integrated into the post-2015 developmentw agenda. The post-2015 
development agenda provides a unique 
opportunity to advance the parallel goals of improving human health and protecting biodiversity. The Sustainable Development Goals will address various aspects of human well-being and be accompanied by targets and indicators. Speciﬁc biodiversity related targets and indicators should be integrated into Goals on food security and nutrition, water and health. The SDG framework should also provide for the enabling conditions for human health and for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and for the 
underlying drivers of both biodiversity loss and 
ill-health to be addressed. This implies Goals for improved governance, and institutions, at appropriate scales (from local to global), for the management of risks and the negotiation 
of trade-oﬀs among stakeholder groups, where 
they exist, as well as for behavioural change.
76. Ongo ing evaluation of synergistic and 
antagonistic effects of complementary sustainable development goals and targets is needed.  This includes sustainable 
development goals and targets addressing health, food and freshwater security, climate change and biodiversity loss and evaluate the long-term impacts of trade-oﬀs is needed; such as the trade-oﬀ and short-term gains 
from intensive and unsustainable agricultural 
production, against longer-term nutritional security. For example, the impacts of unsustainable agricultural practices that may exacerbate climatic pressures may also lead to greater food insecurity, particularly among 
poor and vulnerable populations, by negatively 
influencing its availability, accessibility, utilization and sustainability.
77. Health is our most basic human right 
and therefore one of the most important indicators of sustainable development. At the same time, the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity is imperative for the continued functioning of ecosystems at all scales, and for the delivery of ecosystem services that are essential for human health . There are many 
opportunities for synergistic approaches that promote both biodiversity conservation and the health of humans. However, in some cases there must be trade-oﬀs among these objectives. Indeed, becau se of the complexity 
of interactions among the components of biodiversity at various tropical levels (including parasites and symbionts), and 
21 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Healthacross ecosystems at various scales (from 
the planetary-scale biomes to human-microbial interactions), positive, negative and neutral links are quite likely to occur simultaneously. An enhanced understanding of health–biodiversity relationships will allow for the adjustment of interventions in both 
sectors, with a view to promoting human well-
being over the long-term.
ISTOCKPHOTO22 Connecting Global Priorities: Biodiversity and Human Health